---
layout: post
title: math.
excerpt: The language of physics is math.
author: r.m.
---

I like to think of physics as _looking at reality_ and _saying what happens_. In this sense, there is no such thing as something 'breaking the laws of physics'. If it happens, it's real; if it's real, it's physics. If something _looks_ like it breaks the laws of physics, either

>a) You've been tricked somehow and that's not what actually happened, or

>b) You got the laws of physics wrong, and the _real_ laws are actually different.

_If it happens, it's real; if it's real, it's physics_. So a chicken flapping its wings, or someone dropping their cell phone in jello, or a bathtub filled with ants - those are all physics.

That doesn't sound terribly useful.

The real trick of physics is to try to say as much as possible in as few words as possible. Right away then, our descriptions above run into limitations: "chickens flap their wings" only works for chickens, not for wolves or badgers. "Someone drops their cell phone in jello" is not a very common event, and you can't easily predict when it will happen - maybe if you knew someone very clumsy and you surrounded them with jello while they were holding their phone. The same thing goes for a bathtub full of ants: it's a one-time event, something very unlikely to occur, and even if it did you'd have a hard time predicting it.

So _usually_ when people do physics, they talk about things that they can predict, events that happen a lot. That way you can describe many events at once.

There's another problem with the descriptions above: they only work if someone knows what the words mean. If you know what a chicken is, what wings are, and what flapping is, then that description makes sense to you. But what if you _don't_ know what a chicken is? Then I have to describe it, and that takes up more words. If you know about birds, then maybe I can describe a chicken as a type of bird. What happens if you don't know about cell phones, or jello? Those things are much harder to describe.

Then really our goal is this: describe as much as possible, in as few words as possible, to as many people as possible.

Let's take an example: I could say, "if you hold a rock in your hand above the ground and let it go, it will end up on the ground." This is a fairly general statement: it applies to all rocks, and it applies to anyone who can let go of a rock. However, we can do better.

"Objects move towards the ground, so long as nothing gets in the way." This is pretty good. Now it applies to more than just rocks, and it doesn't matter if a person is there or not. You can probably think up some exceptions to the rule, but it works in _most_ cases. Yet we can be even more descriptive.

"Objects accelerate straight towards the ground at 9.8 meters per second squared". This is a very specific description indeed! As before there are exceptions - for example, the acceleration of a sheet of paper is less than 9.8 meters per second squared. Still, the rule works for a lot of things. Moreover, it tells me _exactly how fast_ something moves towards the ground, instead of just saying "it falls."

This rule has come at a cost: I have used some new words here. We need to define "accelerate", "meter", and "second". Meter and second are not so bad. If I have a stick that is a meter long, I can point to it and say "this much". Similarly, I can clap my hands in a steady rhythm to demonstrate how long a second is.  Accelerate is a bit more difficult, but is doable.

No, there is something much harder to describe in this sentence: "9.8".

How do you describe _numbers_ to someone who doesn't know what a number is? Or in other words: how do we invent _mathematics_?

The language of physics is math. It is the tool that you use to describe the most amount possible. In a sense, that is what math was _created_ for: to describe specific types of patterns in nature.

Math is not limited to describing physics, however. Physics is constrained by what is real; if something _cannot happen_, it is not physics. There is no physics for one apple and one apple making zero apples. On the other hand, you can create mathematics where 1+1=0 (<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_field">yes, really!</a>) You can make up whatever rules you like - the only rule in math is _no contradictions_. So if you use your rules to show that something is true, and then use the _same_ rules to show that something is false, you've done the math wrong.

Physics is all that exists. Mathematics is _anything you can think of that isn't contradictory_.

The consequence of this is that math is more abstract than physics. If physics is about "the patterns of nature", then mathematics might be called "the patterns of patterns". Historically, this has lead to mathematics being more rigorous than physics. If you want to know who's right and who's wrong about a physics question, you can build a device or run an experiment to test your idea. You can always _point at reality_. In mathematics, there's nothing to point to, and so it's much harder to tell the difference between being right and just making something up. Thus, a mathematician's reasoning must be totally airtight.

In order to do physics, you must be prepared to do math. But _inventing_ the math - seeing how it works at the same deep level that we want for the physics - is extremely difficult. What is a line? What is counting? These things are intuitive and easy to overlook because we were taught them as children.

The point I want to make is that inventing physics is hard enough; inventing the _language_ to talk about physics is beyond my current abilities. So I won't be able to describe _everything_ for you. I will have to trust that you know what 9.8 means, and that you understand what squaring a number is.

Now, let us dicuss our first physical concept.